New python manual (#372)
neo4j/driver-documentation: python-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/query-advanced.adoc

= Further query mechanisms

== Auto-commit transactions

> This is the most basic and limited form with which to run a Cypher query. The driver will not automatically retry auto-commit transactions, as it does instead for queries run with xref:transactions#managed-transactions[managed transactions].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the most basic and limited form to run a Cypher query wtih. 
The driver does not automatically retry auto-commit transactions, as it does for queries run with xref:transactions#managed-transactions[managed transactions].
```

> You run an auto-commit transaction with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.run[`Session.run()`]. It returns a `Result` object that needs to be processed with the xref:result#manipulate-result[related methods].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You run an auto-commit transaction with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.run[`Session.run()`]. 
It returns a `Result` object that needs to be processed with the xref:result#manipulate-result[related methods].
```

[source,python]
----
with driver.session() as session:
    session.run("CREATE (a:Person {name: $name})", name=name)
----

> An auto-commit transaction will be committed _at the latest_ when the session is destroyed, or before another transaction is executed within the same session. Other than that, there is no clear guarantee on when exactly an auto-commit transaction will be committed during the lifetime of a session. To ensure an auto-commit transaction is committed, you can call the `.consume()` method on its result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An auto-commit transaction is committed _at the latest_ when the session is destroyed, or before another transaction is executed within the same session. 
Other than that, there is no clear guarantee of when exactly an auto-commit transaction is committed during the lifetime of a session. 
To ensure an auto-commit transaction is committed, you can call the `.consume()` method on its result.
```

Auto-commit transactions should only be used when xref:transactions#managed-transactions[transaction functions] do not fit the purpose, or for quick prototyping.

> [TIP]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[TIP]
====
```

> *This method is the only one that can be used for link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/call-subquery/#subquery-call-in-transactions[`CALL {} IN TRANSACTIONS`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/query-tuning/using/#query-using-periodic-commit-hint[`PERIODIC COMMIT`] queries*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*This method is the only one that can be used for link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/call-subquery/#subquery-call-in-transactions[`CALL {} IN TRANSACTIONS`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/query-tuning/using/#query-using-periodic-commit-hint[`PERIODIC COMMIT`] queries*.
====
```

=== Configure auto-commit transactions with the `Query` object

> The link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Query[`Query`] object allows to specify a query timeout and to attach metadata to the transaction, which will be visible on the server (as described for the xref:transactions#unit_of_work-decorator[`unit_of_work`] decorator).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Query[`Query`] object allows to specify a query timeout and to attach metadata to the transaction, which is visible on the server (as described for the xref:transactions#unit_of_work-decorator[`unit_of_work`] decorator).
```

[source,python]
----
from neo4j import Query

with driver.session() as session:
    query = Query("CREATE (a:Person {name: $name})",
                  timeout=1.0,
                  metadata={"app_name": "people"})
    result = session.run(query, name=name)
----

== Dynamic values in property keys, relationship types, and labels

> In general, you should not concatenate parameters directly into a query, but rather use xref:query-simple#query-parameters[query parameters]. There can however be circumstances where your query structure prevents the usage of parameters in all its parts. In fact, although parameters can be used for literals and expressions as well as node and relationship ids, they cannot be used for the following constructs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, you should not concatenate parameters directly into a query, but rather use xref:query-simple#query-parameters[query parameters]. 
There can, however, be circumstances where your query structure prevents the usage of parameters in all its parts. 
In fact, although parameters can be used for literals and expressions as well as node and relationship ids, they cannot be used for the following constructs:
```

- property keys, so `MATCH (n) WHERE n.$param = 'something'` is invalid;
- relationship types, so `MATCH (n)-[:$param]->(m)` is invalid;
- labels, so `MATCH (n:$param)` is invalid.

> For those queries, you are forced to use string concatenation. To protect against Cypher injections you should enclose the dynamic values in backticks and escape them yourself. Notice that Cypher processes Unicode, so take care of the Unicode literal `\u0060` as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For those queries, you are forced to use string concatenation. 
To protect against Cypher injections you should enclose the dynamic values in backticks and escape them yourself.
Note that Cypher processes Unicode, so enclose the Unicode literal `\u0060` as well.
```

.Manually escaping dynamic labels before concatenation.
[source,python]
----
label = "Person"
# convert \u0060 to literal backtick and then escape backticks
escaped_label = label.replace("\\u0060", "`").replace("`", "``")

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    session.run(
        f"MATCH (p:`{escaped_label}` {{name: $name}}) RETURN p.name",
        name="Alice",
    )
----

> Another workaround, which avoids string concatenation, is using the <<APOC>> procedure link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/apoc/current/overview/apoc.merge/apoc.merge.node/[`apoc.merge.node`]. It supports dynamic labels and property keys, but only for node insertion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another workaround, which avoids string concatenation, is using the <<APOC>> procedure link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/apoc/current/overview/apoc.merge/apoc.merge.node/[`apoc.merge.node`]. 
It supports dynamic labels and property keys, but only for node insertion.
```

.Using `apoc.merge.node` to create a node with dynamic labels/property keys.
[source,python]
----
property_key = "name"
label = "Person"

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    session.run(
        "CALL apoc.merge.node($labels, $properties)",
        labels=[label], properties={property_key: "Alice"},
    )
----

> [NOTE]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
```

> If you are running Neo4j in Docker, APOC needs to be enabled when starting the container. See link:https://neo4j.com/labs/apoc/current/installation/#docker[APOC - Installation - Docker].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running Neo4j in Docker, APOC needs to be enabled when starting the container. See link:https://neo4j.com/labs/apoc/current/installation/#docker[APOC - Installation - Docker].
====
```

== Logging

> The driver logs messages through the native `logging` library to a logger named `neo4j`. To redirect log messages to standard output, use the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.debug.watch[watch] function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The driver logs messages through the native `logging` library to a logger named `neo4j`. 
To redirect log messages to standard output, use the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.debug.watch[watch] function:
```

= Further query mechanisms

== Auto-commit transactions

This is the most basic and limited form with which to run a Cypher query. The driver will not automatically retry auto-commit transactions, as it does instead for queries run with xref:transactions#managed-transactions[managed transactions].

You run an auto-commit transaction with the method link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.run[`Session.run()`]. It returns a `Result` object that needs to be processed with the xref:result#manipulate-result[related methods].

[source,python]
----
with driver.session() as session:
    session.run("CREATE (a:Person {name: $name})", name=name)
----

> An auto-commit transaction will be committed _at the latest_ when the session is destroyed, or before another transaction is executed within the same session. Other than that, there is no clear guarantee on when exactly an auto-commit transaction will be committed during the lifetime of a session. Auto-commit transactions should only be used when xref:transactions#managed-transactions[transaction functions] do not fit the purpose, or for quick prototyping.

Reviewer 2: You might want to mention that `result.consume()` also gives you the guarantee that the tx has been committed.

[TIP]
*This method is the only one that can be used for link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/call-subquery/#subquery-call-in-transactions[`CALL {} IN TRANSACTIONS`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/query-tuning/using/#query-using-periodic-commit-hint[`PERIODIC COMMIT`] queries*.

=== Configure auto-commit transactions with the `Query` object

The link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Query[`Query`] object allows to specify a query timeout and to attach metadata to the transaction, which will be visible on the server (as described for the xref:transactions#unit_of_work-decorator[`unit_of_work`] decorator).

[source,python]
----
from neo4j import Query

with driver.session() as session:
    query = Query("CREATE (a:Person {name: $name})",
                  timeout=1.0,

>                   metadata={app_name: "people"})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                  metadata={"app_name": "people"})
```

.Manually escaping dynamic labels before concatenation.
[source,python]
----
label = "Person"
# convert \u0060 to literal backtick and then escape backticks
escaped_label = label.replace("\\u0060", "`").replace("`", "``")

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    session.run(
        f"MATCH (p:`{escaped_label}` {{name: $name}}) RETURN p.name",
        name="Alice",
    )
----

Another workaround, which avoids string concatenation, is using the <<APOC>> procedure link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/apoc/current/overview/apoc.merge/apoc.merge.node/[`apoc.merge.node`]. It supports dynamic labels and property keys, but only for node insertion.

.Using `apoc.merge.node` to create a node with dynamic labels/property keys.
[source,python]
----
property_key = "name"
label = "Person"

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    session.run(
        "CALL apoc.merge.node($labels, $properties)",
        {
            "labels": [label],
            "properties": {
                property_key: "Alice",
            },

>         }

Reviewer 2: Are you using a dict for the parameters here on purpose? Nothing against it, just to be clear, but I was surprised as it comes without a word about it.

Author: Good point, I missed to update this after taking away the dict structure (or it came straight from Michael Simon's notes). Use kwargs now.

    )
----

[NOTE]
If you are running Neo4j in Docker, APOC needs to be enabled when starting the container. See link:https://neo4j.com/labs/apoc/current/installation/#docker[APOC - Installation - Docker].

== Logging

The driver logs messages through the native `logging` library to a logger named `neo4j`. To redirect log messages to standard output, use the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.debug.watch[watch] function:

[source,python]
----
import sys
from neo4j.debug import watch

watch("neo4j", out=sys.stdout)

> ----

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
----
import sys

from neo4j.debug import watch

watch("neo4j", out=sys.stdout)
----
```
